.\" Copyright (c) 2021-2026 Maik Broemme <mbroemme@libmpq.org>
.\"
.\" This program is free software: you can redistribute it and/or modify
.\" it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as published by
.\" the Free Software Foundation, either version 3 of the License, or
.\" (at your option) any later version.
.\"
.\" This program is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
.\" but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
.\" MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the
.\" GNU General Public License for more details.
.\"
.\" You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public License
.\" along with this program.  If not, see <http://www.gnu.org/licenses/>.
.\"
.\" Additional permission under GNU GPL version 3 section 7 is described in
.\" COPYING.EXCEPTION, allowing this program to link with the Parsec SDK.
.TH VDI-STREAM-CLIENT 1 2026-04-30 "VDI Stream Client" "multimedia"
.SH NAME
vdi-stream-client \- a low latency desktop streaming client
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B vdi-stream-client
[\fI\-\-session\fP <id>] [\fI\-\-peer\fP <id>] [\fIoptions\fP]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.PP
VDI Stream Client is a tiny and low latency Linux client which connects
to Parsec Host running on Windows. It allows to run fully GPU accelerated
Windows desktop environment on a remote machine while streaming the
content to a local Linux system which process keyboard and mouse input.
The remote server can be a virtual machine running on-top of on-premise
deployments of Virtuozzo Hybrid Server, KVM or Xen. It can also connect
to public clouds like Amazon (EC2 G3 Accelerated) or Microsoft Azure
(NV6). It uses Simple DirectMedia Layer (SDL3) for low-level access to
audio, video, keyboard, mouse and clipboard.
.SH OPTIONS
Help options:
.TP 8
.B  \-h|\-\-help
Print the usage message on the standard output.
.TP 8
.B  \-v|\-\-version
Print the currently installed version on the standard output.
.PP
Debug options:
.TP 8
.B  \-\-stats <\fIseconds\fP>
Show render statistics, pipeline stage timings and video stream bandwidth
every \fIseconds\fP seconds. It is disabled by default. Stage timings report
calls, total time and average time for FFmpeg packet submission and frame
receipt, hardware frame transfers, descriptor fallbacks, VA-API zero-copy
rendering, SDL uploads, renders and presents during the current stats period.
Video bandwidth is calculated from compressed video packets delivered to the
FFmpeg decoder during the current stats period. See
.BR "PERFORMANCE TIPS"
for guidance on interpreting idle frame delivery and Parsec host-side
FPS settings.
.PP
Parsec options:
.TP 8
.B  \-\-session <\fIid\fP>
The session ID to connect to Parsec service. This option is mandatory.
.TP 8
.B  \-\-peer <\fIid\fP>
The peer ID of the remote Parsec host. This option is mandatory.
.TP 8
.B  \-\-timeout <\fIseconds\fP>
The connection timeout when first connection to host is established.
There will be no reconnect in this case. The default timeout is 5
seconds.
.TP 8
.B  \-\-speed <\fIspeed\fP>
The mouse wheel sensitivity to use, supported range is between 0
(disable mouse wheel completely) up to 500. The value is in pixel. The
default value is 100.
.TP 8
.B  \-\-width <\fIwidth\fP>
The host screen and window width to use. The host will change
resolution either to specified value or - if not supported - to closest
one which matches. If not used, the client will resize window to current
configured host width. The value is in pixel.
.TP 8
.B  \-\-height <\fIheight\fP>
The host screen and window height to use. The host will change
resolution either to specified value or - if not supported - to closest
one which matches. If not used, the client will resize window to current
configured host height. The value is in pixel.
.PP
Parsec Warp options:
.TP 8
.B  \-\-no\-subsampling
Request 4:4:4 color mode without chroma subsampling. By default, the host
compresses the video stream and applies chroma subsampling with mode 4:2:0
to reduce data transfers. With this option, no chroma subsampling is
applied and the client receives a sharp and crisp stream with mode 4:4:4.
This option is only available under the commercial Parsec Warp subscription.
.PP
Client options:
.TP 8
.B  \-\-no\-acceleration
Disable hardware accelerated client decoding. If disabled, client will
decode frames with FFmpeg in software on CPU. If enabled, client will
use FFmpeg VA-API hardware decoding when available. VA-API frames are
mapped to DRM PRIME and their modifier-aware DMA-BUF planes are imported
through libplacebo into Vulkan without copying frame pixels through CPU
memory. Older RADV devices without DRM modifier support use a validated
multi-planar linear external-memory import path. If direct import fails after
Vulkan setup, the client transfers frames to system memory and uploads them
through libplacebo. Vulkan setup failure falls back to the default SDL
renderer. With software implementation it is almost impossible to reach
smooth client rendering. It is enabled by default.
.TP 8
.B  \-\-no\-upnp
Disable UPnP NAT traversal support. If disabled, client may not be
able to connect to host. If enabled, client will use UPnP to assist
NAT traversal. It is not recommended to turn it off due to UDP
client listening. It is enabled by default.
.TP 8
.B  \-\-no\-reconnect
Disable automatic reconnect in case of network or service failures. If
disabled, client will immediately terminate on failures. If enabled a
black window with text "Reconnecting..." is shown in case of failures.
It is recommended to leave it enabled if you are on roaming or an
unstable and slow network link. It is enabled by default.
.TP 8
.B  \-\-no\-grab
Disable exclusive mouse grab. If disabled, the mouse is passive grabbed
and can enter and leave the window when mouse is moved. If enabled, the
first press of any mouse button will lock the mouse into the window. To
release the mouse grab you need to press "Ctrl+Alt". If an application
requests relative mode it is being grabbed regardless of this option,
mostly the case for DirectX applications and during login of the Windows
user. Without relative grabbing most games would behave unpredictable.
A relative grabe can be released with "Ctrl+Alt". A relative grab can be
noticed in the Window title and with an invisible the mouse cursor.
.TP 8
.B  \-\-no\-decoration
Disable window manager decorations by creating the SDL window with the
.B SDL_WINDOW_BORDERLESS
flag. When this option is used, the client window is shown without
a title bar or window borders. This can be useful for kiosk-style setups,
launchers that manage the window themselves, or compositor and
window-manager rules that place the client as an appliance-like remote
desktop. This option does not enable fullscreen mode and does not change
keyboard or mouse grabbing; combine it with compositor configuration or
the grab options when those behaviors are required. Decorations are enabled
by default.
.TP 8
.B  \-\-no\-screensaver
Disable screen saver and screen locker support on client machine. If
disabled, configured screen saver and lockers are ignored and will never
be started. If enabled, screen saver and lockers will work as usual. It
is enabled by default.
.TP 8
.B  \-\-no\-clipboard
Disable clipboard sharing between client and host. If disabled, the
clipboards of client and host are independent and never synchronized. It
helps to avoid occasional leaks of sensitive information made by copy
and paste mistakes. If enabled, both clipboards are always synchronized
in bi-directional mode. It is enabled by default.
.TP 8
.B  \-\-no\-audio
Disable audio streaming support. If disabled, no audio from host is
streamed and played on client machine. If enabled, audio is streamed
and played with default audio device used by SDL. It is enabled by
default.
.TP 8
.B  \-\-no\-hevc
Disable H.265 (HEVC) video codec. If disabled, client will use H.264
(AVC) through the custom FFmpeg decoder. If enabled, client will use H.265
(HEVC) through the custom FFmpeg decoder.
There is a trade-off between CPU performance and network latency and
bandwidth consumption. When using H.265 (HEVC) - even in case of GPU
decoding - CPU load and network latency is higher while network
bandwidth is reduced. When using H.264 (AVC) the CPU load and network
latency is lower while more network bandwidth is consumed. It is enabled
by default.
.PP
USB options:
.TP 8
.B  \-\-redirect <\fIvendorID\fP>:<\fIproductID\fP>@<\fIip\fP>#<\fIport\fP>,[...]
The USB devices to redirect to the host. The client will monitor the
specified USB device with <\fIvendorID\fP> and <\fIproductID\fP> for
hotplug events (attach and detach). To get a list of available USB devices
you can use the "lsusb" command. If a USB device is connected to the
client, it gets automatically redirected to the host with exclusive
access. The client will connect to <\fIip\fP> and <\fIport\fP> to your
virtualization host to redirect devices to the hypervisor. Multiple USB
devices can be redirected if comma separated. You can redirect up to 8
devices in total. Moreover, devices are reconnected to the host
automatically when you unplug and plug them again to the USB port and if
not connected during startup of the client, they are monitored and
redirected as soon as they are attached.
.SH KEYBOARD CONTROL
During connection to the host, you can use certain key combinations to
release keyboard grab or to switch into force grab mode.
.TP 8
.B  Ctrl+Alt
Toggle mouse and keyboard grab if exclusive mouse grab is enabled. If any
mouse button is pressed, the cursor will be locked into the window and all
keys are passed. The Ctrl+Alt key combination will release the grab.
See \-\-no\-grab option for more details.
.TP 8
.B  Shift+F12
Toggle mouse and keyboard grab regardless if exclusive grab is enabled
or disabled. If enabling forced grab, it will lock the cursor to the window
and pass all keys, except Shift+F12 to the window. The client configured
screen saver and screen locker is disabled and host must process locking.
The Ctrl+Alt key combination will not release a forced grab. If disabling
forced grab, it will release the mouse from the window, don't pass window
manager key combinations anymore and re-enable screen saver and screen
locker if necessary.
.SH WAYLAND TIPS
Wayland compositors normally keep ownership of global shortcuts such as
Alt+Tab, Alt+F4 or Super based key bindings. For VDI, virtual machine,
remote desktop and game streaming clients this means that some key
combinations may be handled by the local compositor instead of being
forwarded to the streamed Windows desktop.
.PP
The Wayland protocol
.BR keyboard-shortcuts-inhibit-unstable-v1
allows a client to request that compositor shortcuts are inhibited for its
surface while it has keyboard focus. If the compositor supports and honors
this protocol, SDL can use it for keyboard grab requests so that shortcuts
such as Alt+Tab can be delivered to vdi-stream-client and forwarded to the
host. If the compositor does not support shortcut inhibition, these
combinations remain under compositor control even when keyboard grab is
requested by the client.
.PP
Some compositors provide compositor-specific configuration as an alternative
or supplement. For example, labwc can disable its own key bindings for a
matching window with a window rule. Add a rule like the following to the
labwc configuration:
.PP
.RS
.nf
<!-- vdi stream client specific settings. -->
<windowRule identifier="vdi-stream-client">

  <!-- allow A-Tab and similar keybinds to be delivered. -->
  <action name="ToggleKeybinds" />
</windowRule>
.fi
.RE
.PP
With such a rule, labwc will stop handling its own key bindings for the
vdi-stream-client window, allowing Alt+Tab and similar shortcuts to reach
the remote session. Other Wayland compositors may require different options,
or may not provide an equivalent mechanism.
.SH PARSEC TIPS
Parsec hosts expose all settings in the host's advanced configuration file
(config.txt, or config.json since Parsec build 150-89). These are host-side
options; they are not client side options and cannot be forced by
vdi-stream-client through the Parsec client SDK.
.TP 8
.BR server_resolution_x=<value> ", " server_resolution_y=<value>
In the Parsec UI, this host setting is shown as "Resolution".

Parsec hosts expose host-side resolution options that control whether the host
accepts client-driven resolution requests, and therefore how the
.BR \-\-width
and
.BR \-\-height
options behave.

When both values are <0>, the host uses "Use Client Resolution", which is the
default. At connect time the host switches its display to the resolution
requested by the client, falling back to the closest matching mode if the exact
value is not in the host display's mode list. This is the mode the
.BR \-\-width
and
.BR \-\-height
options are designed for: the host display is reconfigured, the encoder
streams at the requested dimensions, and the SDL window is sized to match.
Resolution changes requested this way are session-scoped and the host restores
its original resolution once the last client disconnects.

When both values are <65535>, the host uses "Keep Host Resolution". The host
ignores client-driven resolution requests and continues streaming at its own
current display resolution. With this setting the
.BR \-\-width
and
.BR \-\-height
options are ignored and the SDL window is sized to the streamed display
resolution. To change the host resolution under this setting, change it
directly on the host through the Windows Display Settings or the Parsec
overlay.

When other positive values are configured, the host forces that specific
resolution. The
.BR \-\-width
and
.BR \-\-height
options are ignored and the SDL window is sized to the forced streamed
dimensions.
.SH PERFORMANCE TIPS
Parsec hosts expose several performance-related options that affect
host-side encoding CPU usage and client-side decoding workload.
.TP 8
.B  host_full_fps=<boolean>
In the Parsec UI, this host setting is shown as "Constant FPS".

When set to <false> allows the host to reduce idle frame delivery when the
screen is not changing. It reduces unnecessary host encoding work, network
traffic, client decoding work and render wakeups. The option is configured
on the Parsec host side; it is not a client side option and cannot be forced
by vdi-stream-client through the Parsec client SDK.

When set to <true>, the host attempts to keep streaming at the full stream
frame rate even after the desktop becomes static. On VDI style workloads
this can look like the client is still receiving and rendering 60 frames per
second on an idle Windows login screen or empty desktop. For desktop and VDI
usage, keep this host option disabled.

If idle frame delivery is still high with <false>, check the host desktop
for small continuous changes such as a blinking text caret, animated cursor,
clock widget, wallpaper animation, notifications or other compositor activity.
.TP 8
.B  encoder_fps=<fps>
In the Parsec UI, this host setting is shown as "FPS".

For desktop-focused VDI workloads, consider setting the Parsec host option
to <30>. This limits the host encoder to 30 frames per second. This is
usually sufficient for login screens, office applications, terminals,
browsers, and other mostly static workflows, while still feeling responsive
for mouse and keyboard input. For animation-heavy, video, or gaming use
cases, <60> may be preferable.
.SH AUTHOR
Written by Maik Broemme <mbroemme@libmpq.org>
.SH REPORTING BUGS
Report bugs to <https://github.com/mbroemme/vdi-stream-client/issues>
.SH COPYRIGHT
VDI Stream Client is a very tiny and low latency desktop streaming
client for remote Windows guests with GPU passthrough which supports
Nvidia NVENC, AMD VCE, VCN and Intel Quick Sync Video.

Copyright (C) 2020-2026 Maik Broemme <mbroemme@libmpq.org>

This program is free software: you can redistribute it and/or modify
it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as published by
the Free Software Foundation, either version 3 of the License, or
(at your option) any later version.

Additional permission under GNU GPL version 3 section 7 is described in
COPYING.EXCEPTION, allowing this program to link with the Parsec SDK.

This program is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the
GNU General Public License for more details.

You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public License
along with this program.  If not, see <https://www.gnu.org/licenses/>.
